.TH BCL-CONTROL 1 "November 2025" "BCL 1.5.1" "BCL Control Flow Commands"
.SH NAME
bcl-control \- BCL control flow and loop commands
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B IF
.I condition
.B THEN
.I commands
.RB [ ELSEIF
.I condition
.B THEN
.IR commands ]...
.RB [ ELSE
.IR commands ]
.B END
.br
.B WHILE
.I condition
.B DO
.I commands
.B END
.br
.B FOR
.RI [ FROM ]
.I start
.B TO
.I end
.RB [ STEP
.IR increment ]
.B DO
.I commands
.B END
.br
.B FOREACH
.I varname
.B IN
.I list
.B DO
.I commands
.B END
.br
.B SWITCH
.I value
.B DO
.RB [ CASE
.I pattern
.IR commands ]...
.RB [ DEFAULT
.IR commands ]
.B END
.br
.B BREAK
.br
.B CONTINUE
.br
.B RETURN
.RI [ value ]
.br
.B EXIT
.RI [ code ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
BCL provides comprehensive control flow structures for conditional execution, loops, and flow control. All structures use the
.B END
keyword for consistent block termination.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS IF/THEN/ELSE/ELSEIF/END
Conditional execution based on expressions.
.PP
.B Syntax:
.in +4n
.EX
IF condition THEN
    commands
ELSEIF condition THEN
    commands
ELSE
    commands
END
.EE
.in
.PP
Evaluates
.I condition
and executes the corresponding block. Multiple
.B ELSEIF
clauses are supported.
.B ELSE
is optional.
.PP
.B Examples:
.in +4n
.EX
IF [EXPR $x > 0] THEN
    PUTS "Positive"
END

IF [EXPR $age >= 18] THEN
    PUTS "Adult"
ELSE
    PUTS "Minor"
END

# ELSEIF chain
IF [EXPR $score >= 90] THEN
    SET grade "A"
ELSEIF [EXPR $score >= 80] THEN
    SET grade "B"
ELSEIF [EXPR $score >= 70] THEN
    SET grade "C"
ELSE
    SET grade "F"
END
.EE
.in
.SS WHILE/DO/END
Loops while condition is true.
.PP
.B Syntax:
.in +4n
.EX
WHILE condition DO
    commands
END
.EE
.in
.PP
Repeatedly evaluates
.I condition
and executes
.I commands
while condition is true (non-zero).
.PP
.B Examples:
.in +4n
.EX
SET counter 0
WHILE [EXPR $counter < 5] DO
    PUTS "Count: $counter"
    INCR counter
END

# Infinite loop with BREAK
SET running 1
WHILE [EXPR $running] DO
    # ... process ...
    IF [EXPR $done] THEN
        BREAK
    END
END
.EE
.in
.SS FOR/FROM/TO/STEP/DO/END
Numeric iteration loop.
.PP
.B Syntax:
.in +4n
.EX
FOR [FROM] start TO end [STEP increment] DO
    commands
END
.EE
.in
.PP
Iterates from
.I start
to
.I end
(inclusive) with optional
.I increment
(default 1). The current value is available in
.B $__FOR
variable.
.PP
.B Examples:
.in +4n
.EX
# Count 1 to 5
FOR 1 TO 5 DO
    PUTS $__FOR
END

# Count 0 to 10 by 2
FOR 0 TO 10 STEP 2 DO
    PUTS $__FOR                # 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10
END

# Countdown
FOR 10 TO 0 STEP -1 DO
    PUTS "T-minus $__FOR"
END

# Sum calculation
SET total 0
FOR 1 TO 100 DO
    INCR total $__FOR
END
PUTS "Sum 1-100: $total"
.EE
.in
.SS FOREACH/IN/DO/END
Iterates over list elements.
.PP
.B Syntax:
.in +4n
.EX
FOREACH varname IN list DO
    commands
END
.EE
.in
.PP
Iterates over each element in
.IR list ,
assigning the current element to
.IR varname .
.PP
.B Examples:
.in +4n
.EX
SET fruits [LIST apple banana cherry]
FOREACH fruit IN $fruits DO
    PUTS "Fruit: $fruit"
END

# Iterate over array keys
FOREACH key IN [ARRAY NAMES config] DO
    PUTS "$key = $config($key)"
END

# Process files
SET files [GLOB "*.txt"]
FOREACH file IN $files DO
    PUTS "Processing $file"
    # ... process file ...
END
.EE
.in
.SS SWITCH/CASE/DEFAULT/END
Multi-way branching based on value.
.PP
.B Syntax:
.in +4n
.EX
SWITCH value DO
    CASE pattern
        commands
    CASE pattern
        commands
    DEFAULT
        commands
END
.EE
.in
.PP
Compares
.I value
against each
.I pattern
and executes matching case.
.B DEFAULT
is optional and matches if no case matches.
.PP
.B Examples:
.in +4n
.EX
SWITCH $day DO
    CASE Monday
        PUTS "Start of week"
    CASE Friday
        PUTS "Almost weekend"
    CASE Saturday
    CASE Sunday
        PUTS "Weekend!"
    DEFAULT
        PUTS "Midweek"
END

# Command dispatcher
SWITCH $command DO
    CASE start
        startService
    CASE stop
        stopService
    CASE restart
        stopService
        startService
    DEFAULT
        PUTS "Unknown command: $command"
        EXIT 1
END
.EE
.in
.SS BREAK
Exits the innermost loop immediately.
.PP
.B Examples:
.in +4n
.EX
# Find first match
SET found ""
FOREACH item IN $items DO
    IF [STRING MATCH $pattern $item] THEN
        SET found $item
        BREAK
    END
END

# Early exit from WHILE
SET i 0
WHILE [EXPR $i < 1000] DO
    INCR i
    IF [EXPR $i == 100] THEN
        BREAK
    END
END
.EE
.in
.SS CONTINUE
Skips to next iteration of loop.
.PP
.B Examples:
.in +4n
.EX
# Process only even numbers
FOR 1 TO 10 DO
    IF [EXPR $__FOR % 2 != 0] THEN
        CONTINUE
    END
    PUTS "Even: $__FOR"
END

# Skip empty lines
WHILE ![EOF $fh] DO
    SET line [GETS $fh]
    IF [STRING EQUAL $line ""] THEN
        CONTINUE
    END
    processLine $line
END
.EE
.in
.SS RETURN
Returns from procedure with optional value.
.PP
.B Syntax:
.in +4n
.EX
RETURN [value]
.EE
.in
.PP
Exits current procedure and optionally returns
.IR value .
If no value specified, returns empty string.
.PP
.B Examples:
.in +4n
.EX
PROC add WITH a b DO
    RETURN [EXPR $a + $b]
END

PROC isPositive WITH n DO
    IF [EXPR $n > 0] THEN
        RETURN 1
    ELSE
        RETURN 0
    END
END

# Early return
PROC validate WITH input DO
    IF [STRING EQUAL $input ""] THEN
        RETURN "ERROR: empty input"
    END
    # ... validation logic ...
    RETURN "OK"
END
.EE
.in
.SS EXIT
Terminates the program with exit code.
.PP
.B Syntax:
.in +4n
.EX
EXIT [code]
.EE
.in
.PP
Exits the BCL interpreter with the specified exit
.I code
(default 0).
.PP
.B Examples:
.in +4n
.EX
# Normal exit
EXIT 0

# Error exit
IF ![FILE EXISTS $required_file] THEN
    PUTS "Error: Required file not found"
    EXIT 1
END

# Custom exit code
IF [EXPR $errors > 0] THEN
    EXIT 2
END
.EE
.in
.SH NESTED STRUCTURES
All control structures can be nested arbitrarily:
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
FOR 1 TO 10 DO
    SET i $__FOR
    FOR 1 TO 10 DO
        SET j $__FOR
        SET product [EXPR $i * $j]
        PUTS "$i × $j = $product"
    END
END

WHILE [EXPR $running] DO
    IF [EXPR $condition1] THEN
        FOREACH item IN $list DO
            # Nested structures
        END
    ELSE
        SWITCH $value DO
            # ...
        END
    END
END
.EE
.in
.SH COMMON PATTERNS
.SS Loop Until Found
.in +4n
.EX
SET found 0
SET index 0
WHILE [EXPR $index < [LLENGTH $list] && !$found] DO
    SET item [LINDEX $list $index]
    IF [STRING EQUAL $item $target] THEN
        SET found 1
    ELSE
        INCR index
    END
END
.EE
.in
.SS Accumulation
.in +4n
.EX
SET sum 0
FOREACH number IN $numbers DO
    INCR sum $number
END
.EE
.in
.SS Filtering
.in +4n
.EX
SET result [LIST]
FOREACH item IN $items DO
    IF [matchCriteria $item] THEN
        LAPPEND result $item
    END
END
.EE
.in
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bcl (1),
.BR bcl-expr (1),
.BR bcl-proc (1),
.BR bcl-variables (1)
