.TH BCL-EVENT 1 "November 2025" "BCL 2.0.0" "BCL Event System"
.SH NAME
bcl-event \- BCL event-driven programming commands
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B EVENT CREATE
.I fd event_type callback
.br
.B EVENT DELETE
.I fd
.RI [ event_type ]
.br
.B EVENT TIMER
.I milliseconds callback
.br
.B EVENT PROCESS
.RI [ timeout ]
.br
.B EVENT LOOP
.br
.B EVENT STOP
.br
.B EVENT INFO
.SH DESCRIPTION
BCL v2.0 provides a complete event-driven programming system for asynchronous I/O and timer-based callbacks. The event system uses POSIX select() for portable operation and integrates with file descriptors from extensions.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS EVENT CREATE
Register a callback for file descriptor events.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
# Register callback for readable socket
PROC ON_DATA WITH fd DO
    SET data [SOCKET RECV $fd 1024]
    PUTS "Received: $data"
END

EVENT CREATE $socket READABLE ON_DATA

# Event types: READABLE, WRITABLE, EXCEPTION
EVENT CREATE $fd WRITABLE ON_WRITE_READY
EVENT CREATE $fd EXCEPTION ON_ERROR
.EE
.in
.PP
The callback procedure receives the file descriptor as a parameter.
.SS EVENT DELETE
Remove registered event handler.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
# Delete specific event type
EVENT DELETE $fd READABLE

# Delete all events for this fd
EVENT DELETE $fd
.EE
.in
.SS EVENT TIMER
Register a one-shot timer callback.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
# Timer after 5 seconds
PROC ON_TIMEOUT DO
    PUTS "5 seconds elapsed"
END

EVENT TIMER 5000 ON_TIMEOUT

# Immediate timer (0 ms)
EVENT TIMER 0 ON_IMMEDIATE

# Repeating timer (re-register in callback)
PROC ON_TICK DO
    GLOBAL count
    INCR count
    IF [EXPR $count < 10] THEN
        EVENT TIMER 1000 ON_TICK
    END
END

EVENT TIMER 1000 ON_TICK
.EE
.in
.SS EVENT PROCESS
Process pending events once, with optional timeout.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
# Poll (non-blocking)
SET result [EVENT PROCESS 0]

# Wait up to 1 second
SET result [EVENT PROCESS 1000]

# Block indefinitely
SET result [EVENT PROCESS]
.EE
.in
.PP
Returns 1 if an event was processed, 0 on timeout.
.SS EVENT LOOP
Run event loop indefinitely until EVENT STOP is called.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
# Set up events
EVENT CREATE $server READABLE ON_ACCEPT
EVENT TIMER 60000 ON_HEARTBEAT

# Run forever
PUTS "Server started"
EVENT LOOP
PUTS "Server stopped"
.EE
.in
.SS EVENT STOP
Stop the event loop (causes EVENT LOOP to return).
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
PROC ON_SIGNAL DO
    PUTS "Stopping server..."
    EVENT STOP
END
.EE
.in
.SS EVENT INFO
Returns list of all registered events in human-readable format.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
SET info [EVENT INFO]
PUTS "Registered events:\\n$info"
.EE
.in
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS TCP Echo Server
.in +4n
.EX
LOAD "extensions/socket.so"

GLOBAL clients
SET clients [LIST]

PROC ON_ACCEPT WITH server_fd DO
    GLOBAL clients
    SET client [SOCKET ACCEPT $server_fd]
    SET clients [LAPPEND $clients $client]
    EVENT CREATE $client READABLE ON_DATA
END

PROC ON_DATA WITH client_fd DO
    GLOBAL clients
    SET data [SOCKET RECV $client_fd 1024]
    
    IF [EXPR [STRING LENGTH $data] == 0] THEN
        SOCKET CLOSE $client_fd
        EVENT DELETE $client_fd
    ELSE
        SOCKET SEND $client_fd $data
    END
END

SET server [SOCKET SERVER 9999]
EVENT CREATE $server READABLE ON_ACCEPT
EVENT LOOP
.EE
.in
.SS Periodic Timer
.in +4n
.EX
GLOBAL tick
SET tick 0

PROC ON_TICK DO
    GLOBAL tick
    INCR tick
    PUTS "Tick $tick"
    
    IF [EXPR $tick < 10] THEN
        EVENT TIMER 1000 ON_TICK
    ELSE
        EVENT STOP
    END
END

EVENT TIMER 1000 ON_TICK
EVENT LOOP
.EE
.in
.SH NOTES
.IP \[bu] 2
Callbacks for I/O events receive the file descriptor as a parameter
.IP \[bu]
Timer callbacks receive no parameters
.IP \[bu]
Timers are one-shot; re-register in callback for repeating timers
.IP \[bu]
Timer precision: millisecond accuracy with ±10% variance
.IP \[bu]
Maximum file descriptors: ~1000 with select() (system-dependent)
.IP \[bu]
Use epoll/kqueue extensions for >1000 connections
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bcl-system (1),
.BR bcl (1),
.BR bcl (7)
.PP
Complete documentation: docs/EVENT_SYSTEM.md
.SH AUTHOR
BCL Development Team
